Add confidential client troubleshooting guide (#760)
MicrosoftDocs/microsoft-authentication-library-dotnet: msal-dotnet-articles/advanced/exceptions/confidential-client-troubleshooting.md

Reviewer: For SEO, change the file name to `confidential-client-troubleshoot.md`

Author: Renamed the file to `confidential-client-troubleshoot.md` and updated the `href` in `msal-dotnet-articles/TOC.yml`. I checked for other cross-links to the old name and there are none. On `.openpublishing.redirection.json`: the entries in this repo are all for previously published files, and this article is brand new and has never been published, so no redirect entry is needed. Happy to add one if you'd prefer it for safety.

title: Troubleshooting confidential client applications
description: Diagnose and resolve common errors in confidential client apps using MSAL.NET, including throttling, socket exhaustion, OBO failures, client credential errors, and token cache misses.
author: nebharg
manager: bgavril
ms.author: nebharg
ms.date: 05/18/2026
ms.service: msal
ms.subservice: msal-dotnet
ms.reviewer:
ms.topic: troubleshooting-general
ms.custom:
#Customer intent: As a developer building confidential client applications (web apps, web APIs, daemon services), I want to diagnose and fix common token acquisition failures so that my service remains reliable.
---

# Troubleshooting confidential client applications

This guide covers common issues specific to confidential client applications (web apps, web APIs, and daemon/service apps). For general exception handling, see [Handle errors and exceptions in MSAL.NET](msal-error-handling.md).

## Throttling (HTTP 429 and AADSTS50196)

### Symptoms

- `MsalServiceException` with HTTP status code 429
- Error code `AADSTS50196` — "The server terminated an operation because it encountered a loop"
- `MsalThrottledServiceException` (MSAL 4.47.0+)

### Common causes

> 1. **Missing or misconfigured token cache** — Every call goes to Microsoft Entra ID instead of serving tokens from the cache.

Reviewer: If this list is not sequential, make it bulleted instead of numbered.

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim — the causes list under **Network instability and socket exceptions** is now bulleted.

2. **Requesting tokens in a tight loop** — For example, calling `AcquireTokenForClient` on every incoming request without checking the cache first.

> 3. **Too many distinct scopes/resources** — Each unique scope produces a separate cached token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Missing or misconfigured token cache** — Every call goes to Microsoft Entra ID instead of serving tokens from the cache.
- **Requesting tokens in a tight loop** — For example, calling `AcquireTokenForClient` on every incoming request without checking the cache first.
- **Too many distinct scopes/resources** — Each unique scope produces a separate cached token.
```
Nonsequential lists should be bulleted, per MS style.

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim — the causes list under **Throttling** is now bulleted.

2. **Verify your token cache is working.** Check `AuthenticationResult.AuthenticationResultMetadata.TokenSource` — if it always shows `IdentityProvider` instead of `Cache`, your cache isn't being used.

   ```csharp
   var result = await app.AcquireTokenForClient(scopes).ExecuteAsync();

   if (result.AuthenticationResultMetadata.TokenSource == TokenSource.IdentityProvider)
   {
       // This should NOT happen on every call - investigate cache configuration
       logger.LogWarning("Token was fetched from IdP, not cache. CacheRefreshReason: {Reason}",
           result.AuthenticationResultMetadata.CacheRefreshReason);
   }
   ```

3. **Respect `Retry-After` headers.** When you receive a 429, the `MsalServiceException.Headers` property includes a `RetryAfter` value:

   ```csharp
   catch (MsalServiceException ex) when (ex.StatusCode == 429)
   {
       TimeSpan delay = ex.Headers.RetryAfter?.Delta
           ?? TimeSpan.FromSeconds(ex.Headers.RetryAfter?.Date?.Subtract(DateTimeOffset.Now).TotalSeconds ?? 60);

>        await Task.Delay(delay);

Author: Fixed. The sample now handles `Delta` and `Date` as separate cases with pattern matching (`retryAfter?.Delta is TimeSpan delta` / `retryAfter?.Date is DateTimeOffset date`), so the nullable is unwrapped properly and it compiles. It defaults to 60 seconds when neither is present, computes `date - DateTimeOffset.UtcNow` for the absolute form, and clamps the result with `if (delay < TimeSpan.Zero) delay = TimeSpan.Zero;` so clock skew can never pass a negative value to `Task.Delay`.

> [!TIP]
> Starting with MSAL 4.47.0, throttled responses throw `MsalThrottledServiceException` (a subclass of `MsalServiceException`) which makes it easier to distinguish throttling from other service errors.

## Network instability and socket exceptions

### Symptoms

- `HttpRequestException` (often with an inner `SocketException`) when acquiring tokens.
- Intermittent failures during calls to the Microsoft Entra token endpoint.
- High latency in MSAL operations (`AuthenticationResult.AuthenticationResultMetadata.DurationTotalInMs`).

### Common causes

1. **Not caching tokens** — Without caching, every token request results in a network call to Microsoft Entra ID. This increases exposure to transient network failures and socket exhaustion.
2. **Service outage or local network issues** — The token endpoint may be temporarily unavailable, or the local network is unstable.
3. **Custom `HttpClient` overriding MSAL's default** — MSAL's built-in `HttpClient` is designed to be scalable. If you override it, connection management becomes your responsibility.

> 4. **Firewall or network rules** — Recent updates to network or firewall rules may be blocking outbound traffic to `login.microsoftonline.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Not caching tokens** — Without caching, every token request results in a network call to Microsoft Entra ID. This increases exposure to transient network failures and socket exhaustion.
- **Service outage or local network issues** — The token endpoint may be temporarily unavailable, or the local network is unstable.
- **Custom `HttpClient` overriding MSAL's default** — MSAL's built-in `HttpClient` is designed to be scalable. If you override it, connection management becomes your responsibility.
- **Firewall or network rules** — Recent updates to network or firewall rules may be blocking outbound traffic to `login.microsoftonline.com`.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim — the AADSTS50013 causes list is now bulleted.

To verify that tokens are being served from cache, check the `TokenSource` property on the authentication result:

```csharp
var result = await app.AcquireTokenForClient(scopes).ExecuteAsync();

if (result.AuthenticationResultMetadata.TokenSource == TokenSource.IdentityProvider)
{
    // Token was fetched from the network - this should only happen on the first call or after expiry
    logger.LogWarning("Token not served from cache. CacheRefreshReason: {Reason}",
        result.AuthenticationResultMetadata.CacheRefreshReason);
}
```

If `TokenSource` consistently returns `IdentityProvider` instead of `Cache`, your token cache is not configured correctly.

For web apps and web APIs, use a distributed token cache (for example, Redis). See [High availability](../high-availability.md#use-the-token-cache) for configuration guidance.

If you provide a custom `HttpClient`, ensure it's long-lived and properly manages connection pooling. See [Providing your own HttpClient](../httpclient.md).

Verify if there are any recent updates to network or firewall rules that might have caused connectivity issues to `login.microsoftonline.com` and regional endpoints.

> ## On-Behalf-Of (OBO) failures

Reviewer 2: there are also cases where a `UiRequiredException` is thrown and the user needs to handle conditional access by satisfying the provided access policies in the claims.

See [MsalUiRequiredException ](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/msal/dotnet/acquiring-tokens/web-apps-apis/on-behalf-of-flow#handling-multi-factor-auth-mfa-conditional-access-and-incremental-consent)

Author: Added a new subsection under **On-Behalf-Of (OBO) failures** called `MsalUiRequiredException` — conditional access, MFA, or incremental consent. It covers the symptoms (`AcquireTokenOnBehalfOf` throwing `MsalUiRequiredException` with `Claims` set), the causes (CA policy on the downstream resource, incremental consent), and the resolution: the web API returns `HTTP 401` with a `WWW-Authenticate` header carrying `ex.Claims`, and the client re-acquires a token with `.WithClaims()`. It links to the [Handling MFA, conditional access and incremental consent](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/msal/dotnet/acquiring-tokens/web-apps-apis/on-behalf-of-flow#handling-multi-factor-auth-mfa-conditional-access-and-incremental-consent) section you referenced.

### AADSTS50013 — Assertion validation failed

#### Symptoms

> `MsalServiceException` with error code `AADSTS50013: Assertion failed signature validation` or `invalid_grant`.

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth stating that apps should not try to extract the AADSTS error codes and to handle these dynamically. The codes are just references. 

The exception types are sufficient for dynamic processing, e.g. UiRequiredException - need to reprompt the user, ClaimsExcepton - need to add claims.

Author: Good call. Added an `[!IMPORTANT]` note right under the article intro: the `AADSTS` codes in the article are references for humans diagnosing a problem, they aren't a stable API, and apps shouldn't extract or branch on them programmatically. It directs readers to branch on the MSAL exception *type* instead — catch `MsalUiRequiredException` to reprompt, and check `MsalServiceException.Claims` to send a claims challenge. Repeated the same point in the new OBO conditional access section.

#### Common causes

1. The incoming token (user assertion) has expired.
2. The token was issued by a different authority than expected.

> 3. The audience (`aud`) of the token doesn't match the app's client ID or app ID URI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The incoming token (user assertion) has expired.
- The token was issued by a different authority than expected.
- The audience (`aud`) of the token doesn't match the app's client ID or app ID URI.
```

Author: Converted to a bulleted list — these are independent things to check, not ordered steps. Also added a bullet pointing at the new note recommending managed identity, federated credentials, or certificates over secrets.

#### Resolution

- Verify that the access token passed to `.WithUserAssertion()` is fresh and intended for your API.
- Ensure your API's app registration has the correct `accessTokenAcceptedVersion` (v2 tokens use `api://{clientId}` as audience).
- Check that the authority in your `ConfidentialClientApplication` matches the token issuer's tenant.

### AADSTS65001 — Consent not granted for OBO

#### Symptoms

`MsalServiceException` with error code `AADSTS65001` when calling `AcquireTokenOnBehalfOf`.

#### Common causes

The downstream API scopes haven't been consented to by the user or admin. OBO requires that the user (or a tenant admin) has granted consent for the downstream permissions.

#### Resolution

1. Ensure the required downstream API permissions are declared in your app registration under **API permissions**.
2. For multi-tenant apps, trigger admin consent using the admin consent URL:
   ```

>    https://login.microsoftonline.com/{tenant}/adminconsent?client_id={clientId}

Author: Added. The admin consent URL is now `https://login.microsoftonline.com/{tenant}/adminconsent?client_id={clientId}&redirect_uri={redirectUri}`, with an explanation that `redirect_uri` is required, must be URL-encoded, and must exactly match a reply URL registered on the app registration under **Authentication** — Microsoft Entra ID redirects the admin back there after consent, so the request fails if it's missing or doesn't match.

   ```
3. For single-tenant apps, have a tenant admin grant consent through the Microsoft Entra admin center.

### OBO token too large

#### Symptoms

HTTP 431 (Request Header Fields Too Large) from downstream APIs, or `MsalServiceException` indicating the token response is too large.

#### Common causes

Users with many group memberships produce large tokens. When OBO exchanges these, the resulting token can exceed HTTP header size limits.

#### Resolution

- Configure your app registration to use **groups claims with a filter** or switch to `hasgroups` / `_claim_names` claims (which return a Graph URL instead of embedding all groups).
- Use the [groups overage pattern](/azure/active-directory/develop/id-token-claims-reference#groups-overage-claim) to query Microsoft Graph for group membership at runtime.

## Client credential errors

### AADSTS7000215 — Invalid client secret

#### Symptoms

`MsalServiceException` with `AADSTS7000215: Invalid client secret provided`.

> #### Resolution

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that we wanted to move away from client secrets due to security. Should probable add a comment here encouraging customers to use certs or some other auth method.

Author: Added an `[!IMPORTANT]` note at the top of the **Client credential errors** section. It calls out that client secrets are the least secure option and gives a preference order: managed identity when running on Azure, federated identity credentials (workload identity federation) when running outside Azure, then certificates / signed client assertions. It closes with guidance to use secrets only for local development and never to check them into source control. Also added a pointer to that note from the AADSTS7000215 resolution.

> 1. Verify the secret value (not the secret ID) is used in your configuration.

Reviewer: Should this list be bulleted rather than numbered?

Author: Converted to a bulleted list — nonsequential.

2. Check that the secret hasn't expired in the Microsoft Entra admin center under **Certificates & secrets**.
3. Ensure there are no trailing whitespace or encoding issues when loading the secret from configuration/Key Vault.

### AADSTS700024 — Client assertion expired

#### Symptoms

`MsalServiceException` with `AADSTS700024: Client assertion is not within its valid time range`.

#### Common causes

The certificate used to sign client assertions has expired, or the system clock is significantly skewed.

#### Resolution

> 1. Check certificate expiration: ensure the certificate's `NotAfter` date hasn't passed.

Reviewer: Should this list be bulleted rather than numbered?

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim — the AADSTS700016 causes list is now bulleted.

2. Verify system clock synchronization (NTP).
3. If using Azure Key Vault for certificates, ensure your app is loading the latest version. See [Certificate rotation](../high-availability.md#certificate-rotation) for best practices.

### AADSTS700016 — Application not found

#### Symptoms

`MsalServiceException` with `AADSTS700016: Application with identifier '{clientId}' was not found in the directory '{tenant}'`.

#### Common causes

1. Wrong `ClientId` in configuration.
2. The app registration exists in a different tenant than the authority being used.

> 3. For multi-tenant apps, the app hasn't been consented to in the target tenant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wrong `ClientId` in configuration.
- The app registration exists in a different tenant than the authority being used.
- For multi-tenant apps, the app hasn't been consented to in the target tenant.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim — the managed identity / IMDS causes list is now bulleted.

3. **Check for accidental `WithForceRefresh(true)`** in your code — this bypasses the cache entirely.

4. **For distributed caches (Redis, SQL):** Ensure the serialization callbacks (`SetBeforeAccessAsync`/`SetAfterAccessAsync`) are registered and not throwing silently.

   ```csharp
   // Verify cache callbacks are firing
   app.AppTokenCache.SetBeforeAccessAsync(async args =>
   {
       logger.LogDebug("Cache read for {SuggestedKey}", args.SuggestedCacheKey);
       // Load from distributed store
   });
   ```

## Managed Identity failures

### IMDS timeout or unavailable

#### Symptoms

- `MsalServiceException` with error message indicating IMDS (Instance Metadata Service) is unreachable.
- Long delays (2+ seconds) before token acquisition fails.
- `HttpRequestException` or `TaskCanceledException` during managed identity calls.

#### Common causes

1. The application is not running in an Azure environment that supports managed identity (e.g., running locally or in an unsupported hosting environment).
2. Network Security Group (NSG) rules block access to the IMDS endpoint (`169.254.169.254`).

> 3. A user-assigned managed identity ID is specified but doesn't exist or isn't assigned to the resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The application is not running in an Azure environment that supports managed identity (e.g., running locally or in an unsupported hosting environment).
- Network Security Group (NSG) rules block access to the IMDS endpoint (`169.254.169.254`).
- A user-assigned managed identity ID is specified but doesn't exist or isn't assigned to the resource.
```

Author: Converted to a bulleted list, and reindented the nested code sample to match. I also audited the rest of the article and converted the other nonsequential numbered lists to bullets (the throttling **Resolution** list, the AADSTS65001 consent resolution, and the AADSTS700024 resolution). I kept numbering only where the list is a genuine ordered procedure — the **Diagnostic steps** under token cache miss, and the two-step API-then-client sequence in the new OBO conditional access section.
